I can give you many examples of that. Venezuelan
equine encephalomyelitis
entered the state of Texas in July of 1971. We had no
expertise in that disease. I see. Whole cholera
entered Texas in that same year from Mexico. Whole
cholera is now a foreign animal disease. Exotic
Newcastle disease has been diagnosed in Texas in
poultry.
Screw worms. Some of these diseases are not
necessarily tropical diseases, but diseases
that are foreign to this country and diseases in
which a tremendous expertise should be developed
in order to cope with them Before they hit, not
after. We were caught with our pants down when VWE
hit Texas. Which is what, VWE? Venezuelan equine
cephalomyelitis. And if it hadn't been for the
vaccine that had been developed by the Army at Fort
Detrick, we would have been up the proverbial
creek.
So, in your opinion then, would you say, and I don't
want to put words in your mouth, but would you say
that this college and their research seems to be
short-sighted? Well, Dr. Anderson, I think the
reason- Or just too narrow and- No, the reason why
the research isn't broader than it is is I think
because all
animal disease research now, practically all
animal disease research is controlled through
the Experiment Station. I think it should be the
responsibility of the College of Veterinary
Medicine to do animal disease research.
The expertise for animal disease research
resides in the College of Animal Medicine, not in
the Experiment Station.
And the
present setup, whereby the director of the
Experiment Station controlled the monies to fund
animal disease research, I don't think is
advantageous for the College of Veterinary
Medicine. This is a political, infrastructural
policy over which I exercise absolutely no say.
But in my opinion, the College of Veterinary
Medicine should be the sole agent for the
university system in matters pertaining to
animal disease research. This is not to say that
some research should not be done collaboratively
with the departments of animal science,
entomology, or any other department. For
example, in fish culture, mariculture study, we
ought to cooperate with other departments on this
campus in... in bringing the best minds of the
university system to bear upon a problem. That's
my opinion. In other words, it seems that we need
more cooperation and coordination of our
research efforts? I think that one of the things
that is necessary is that the College of
Veterinary Medicine be given
more autonomy.
There is no reason in the world why a research
project that is written by a veterinary
researcher ought to be approved by the experiment
station. I think that's absurd. It should be
approved by the dean here and then by the president
of the university.
I don't see any reason why we should respond to an
intermediate agency that has no expertise in
animal health, except the director. And the
director is a veterinarian who had never
functioned as a veterinarian for the last 20 years
of his life. He's been an administrator.
But you see, he used to be associate dean for
research here before his promotion. But in my
opinion, there isn't the fluidity of
administrative matters
that should circulate between this college and
the Office of International Programs, for
example, I think there should be more intimate
contact between the Office of International
Programs and the College of Veterinary Medicine
in matters pertaining to animal health. I'm not
talking about academic matters. I'm not talking
about the possible recruitment of foreign
students to the College of Veterinary Medicine.
That's not what I'm talking about. I'm talking
about capitalizing on opportunities that exist
abroad for the research of animal diseases that
could possibly threaten the welfare of this state
and of this country. Let me give you an example.
African swine fever is a deadly disease of swine
for which there is no vaccine. Traditionally,
African swine fever has been limited to Africa and
to Spain and Portugal and other countries in that
area of the world. But in 1978, this disease broke
out in Brazil. From Brazil, it has spread to
Dominican Republic, it has spread to Haiti, and
it's now in Cuba. And it is too close for comfort. If
it hits the United States, and I am convinced that
it will enter the United States. I don't know when,
but I think it will hit this country. And I think
that this College of Veterinary Medicine ought to
be readying for the time when this disease is going
to hit our shores. And right now, there has been,
for the last few years, a limitation of funds from
the federal government for animal disease
research. But what little monies there have come
to the university, they have gone to the
experiment station. Of course, the director of
the experiment station has complete latitude to
determine where that money should go. What agency
in the country would be working on this African?
Well, right now, for example, to answer your
question, the United States Department of
Agriculture is cooperating with the Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
to fund a team of people
that is established in Santo Domingo, the
Dominican Republic, to transfer the technology
necessary for those people who diagnose African
Swine Fever, and not only them, but also all the
Caribbean countries and South and Central
American countries. This university possesses
the personnel that are qualified to head up that
program, and I think international programs
could very easily be the focal point from which a
proposal could be turned into FAO and say, let
Texas A&M provide the personnel and here's how
much it would cost. They're looking for personnel
right now, but it is, I think, there's been a
discouragement of participation in in the
international animal health problem.
And here in our administration? In our own
college, in our own university. Why do you think
that is? Well, maybe because of the well-tried
Texas axiom, you know, that what happens in other
countries is no business of ours. We've got enough
animal health problems in our own state we should
direct our efforts to the solution of those and to
hell with everybody else. I think that's the
reason. Although I doubt very much that you would
find anybody on this campus that would admit to
that. That's the result.
Also, if you disagree with existing policy and you
try and point to people and say, We have to develop
some knowledge about this disease. We can do it on
foreign soil where it will not be a threat to Texas.
We can make a significant contribution in this
area by developing a vaccine against African
swine fever or against babesiosis or against
anaplasmosis. We have the opportunity to
dispatch our people to foreign soil and let them
set up a laboratory that that will work and address
these problems without endangering our own uh
situation at home and won't cost the state of Texas
anything but you try and get these people to to uh to
encourage that that type of thinking and they look
the other way and they're the ones that are in
charge of these decisions i've been very very
disillusioned by by the
by the morale that had been affected adversely
here among people who are in this College of
Veterinary Medicine. There are a lot of
veterinarians who would like to do some research
abroad, but there is no room under the present
policy for this to happen, and it is not likely to
change until the only way you can do that is to is to
emulate the program in other universities. How do
they respond? Why should $125,000 go to the
University of Tennessee, who has yet to graduate
its first student for agricultural research,
when the state of Texas A&M has been here since
1876? in the School of Veterinary Medicine since
1916. Why should a university who is unproved in
this field get $125,000 from a private
industrial giant? Tennessee did. Tennessee did?
Yeah. $125,000 of gift from the International
Chemical and Mineral Corporation for research in
in agricultural research, primarily with a
tropical flavor, you know. There's no reason in
the world why that money should not be here,
because this College of Veterinary Medicine has
more expertise in foreign animal diseases. It has
the diagnostic laboratory here very, very, very
close by. It has people who have served abroad and
who want to serve abroad, but then if they serve
abroad, they'll get out of the tenure track.
Really? Sure. There's another point that I tried
to sell. Why should a guy who was assigned as a
member of the A&M teaching faculty abroad lose his
opportunity to earn tenure. That doesn't make
sense to me. If you consider him good enough to hire
and respond to a contract and be classified as a
member of the A&M team abroad, you should also
consider him worthy of earning tenure. But he has
no academic rank as long as he's abroad, you see.
Unless he earned that academic rank before, he was
dispatched abroad.
So it sort of discriminates against a person who is
interested in international education? I think
so. I think so. I certainly have not elaborated any
more proposals. I wrote dozens of proposals when I
was director of the experiment, director of the
Institute of Tropical Veterinary Medicine. And
it so happened that my directorship coincided
with the with the lowest awards in international
veterinary medicine that this country had
experienced. It's a very complex topic because
you see AID, the Agency for International
Development was instrumental in in organizing a
method by which funds for international research
could be apportioned to deserving universities.
And they appointed a board that is called the Board
of International Food and Agricultural
Development. They appointed a committee that's
called the Joint Committee for Agricultural
Research. And another committee, and this is
under the Title 12 program, And the Title 12
program for two and a half years had not been well
organized enough to make these awards
expeditiously. They had spent too much time
organizing themselves. As a matter of fact, our
own President Miller is a member of one of those
committees, the Joint Committee for
Agricultural Development. Well, what I'm
telling you is that if this university manifested
a sincere effort to participate in international
agricultural projects, that it could do so. We
have, and particularly, an international animal
health problem. We have the expertise. We have the
willingness. and we have personnel who wish to be
assigned abroad, but their economic stability
cannot be guaranteed by assignment to one of these
international projects. I have made no effort now
because I had—I'm silent now in this area. I don't
intend to to aggravate anybody else. I have done
enough of that for the last four years. It is clear
that they have not moved in that direction, and so
it's useless for me to keep on fighting, and I must
address my own interest, and that is to teach
pathology. Okay, I have one final but large
question to ask. Now, you left in 1959 and came back
in 1975. 76. 76.
What were the changes that you noticed when you got
back? Changes in the College of Vet Medicine?
Well, many changes. You know, when I left here,
there were 32 people on the faculty. I would
venture that today there's 140 on the teaching
staff here, without counting them. That's my
guess. That's a tremendous change. Whereas we
used to accept only 64 a year, now they're taking
145 or so candidates.
And the growth has been phenomenal. not only in the
College of Environmental Medicine, but
university-wide.
The construction of new buildings, the monies
that this university has attracted for research
purposes. We have some very, very outstanding
scientists in other fields, such as nuclear
physics, and such as in marine sciences. To answer
your question, the primary
changes that I have seen have been of phenomenal
growth that would blow anybody's mind. Women
students also. Yes, of course.
When I was on the faculty here, every year they
would take a poll among the faculty to find out
whether we would support a coeducational
university. Oh, really? Back in the 1950s? Yes,
sir. Every year I voted in favor of it. Because
there again, you see, the traditionalists were
acting as an anchor around A&M's neck. They didn't
want to admit any women.
you know, to say that this is a provincial attitude
is to utter a gross understatement. And the
mentality of a lot of otherwise good Aggies who
think that by preserving the traditions of A&M and
all that, that they're going to to function in the
best interest of the university. That's a fallacy
that no one can impress them with adequately. Not
even by hitting them across the forehead with a
4x4. We could see that in the 50s when this
university was losing enrollment to the other
Southwest Conference schools. Our enrollment
was really falling. because the kids didn't want
to come here if there were no girls here. And
another thing is that it's just immoral to deny
admission to a woman simply because for the
previous 75 years no woman had attended. You know,
there's no reason. It was the final awakening and
the realization when they started hitting A&M in
the pocketbook that we were not going to attract
deserving human beings to this university, in
teaching, research, or in the student body,
unless we changed our thinking. And it was that
economic stress and the possibility of
aggravating a bad economic state that caused A&M
to change. And fortunately, we had a president
here whose vision was unlimited, and that was Earl
Rutter. and it was, it was, it was his vision and his
leadership that embarked A&M upon a program of
phenomenal growth, I think. Now how did, how did
your colleagues back in the 1950s vote? Was it a
pretty close vote about women, or? The faculty
always overwhelmingly voted in favor of
co-educational university. In the College of
Medicine? Those that I knew. I really believe that
this was the case among the faculty in the other
departments as well. Oh yeah, it was. It was. But it
was the student body and the alumni who were the
unshakable traditionalists that kept A&M from
being co-educational for so many years. And then
finally there was a suit brought against A&M by
women who wanted to attend the College of Animal
Medicine. This is the only school in the state.
They wouldn't have to go to court if people had the
foresight, you know, to see that this was immoral.
And it was this federal suit that was brought
against A&M for this purpose that finally began to
change a lot of people's minds. Yeah, this is the
only land grant institution in the entire nation
that was all male. There's no rhyme or reason for
that, to that, but see there's a mentality among,
among, among people in Texas that is difficult to
put your finger on and say, this guy is going to
think this way or going to react this way towards
minorities or towards women or towards the
possible benefits of expansion. There's a lot of
people who even now today say that the worst thing
that could have happened to A&M was for A&M to grow
as rapidly as it did. we are going to pay the penalty
for because we're not prepared for this
phenomenal growth and we're going to be playing
catch up and all but the statistics don't seem to
support that that kind of thing we continue to draw
tremendous sums of money for research I think that
we we are at the latest count that I heard we were
about number 17 in the country in the amount of
research dollars that are poured into this
country, into this university. It merits it. We
genuinely have, I think, the best university in
this country. It could be made better. We should
not rest on our past laurels. Why do you think it's
the best university in the country? Because of
many reasons. Its location, because of the
tremendous influence of agriculture on our
state. And this is primarily an agricultural
university. It has the biggest college of
agriculture in the country. People come to A&M to
learn about how to be better ranchers, better
farmers, and better stockmen. better swine
producers, or better poultry producers, or in
horticulture, how to produce more fruit out of
orchards, how to make use of our tremendous
resources in the state. You know, our citrus
industry could be improved greatly, and I think it
would really compete with Florida and California
if, you know, if the marketing difficulties could
be worked out
we can produce better grapefruit than Florida can
our soil is better this this state is gifted with a
tremendous number of resources
not the least of which is oil but also a tremendous
capacity to produce agriculturally and because
of the experience and and the contributions that
have been made by so many outstanding people.
People in the animal science are doing incredible
things in conjunction with our own
veterinarians. They have, they have done a lot to
increase the productivity of the state in
agriculture. Okay, I'm gonna ask you one last
question. All right. asked before, how would you
summarize your contribution to the College of
Veterinary Medicine? Well,
I think that probably I rank
my establishment of all three laboratories as my
outstanding contribution to this university. In
other words, the Institute of Tropical
Veterinary Medicine had been in existence for 12
years, and it didn't have a place to really do some
outstanding research at Falcon Heights, in an
area that is owned by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, and an area in which they have
allowed us to work jointly with them. I
established the laboratory, the Arthropod
Tissue Culture Lab,
thinking that by growing tick cell lines, we might
be able to make a vaccine against Texas fever. Now,
that's not, that work is still going on. We are the
only laboratory in the Western Hemisphere that
has grown those ticks in culture, adapted those
cells to culture. And I think that those are
probably my, my greatest contributions. I have
taught over 300 veterinarians in the state of
Texas. I think that that's also a contribution
that I made to my profession here in the state. The
head of my department was my student. Really?
That's right, Dr. Pierce. The head of the
physiology and pharmacology department was my
student, Dr. McCready.
I still have several of my students here. Dr.
Crawford in public health was my student. Dr.
Huff, Dr. Kleber, these guys were all students of
mine.
The present president of the Texas Veterinary
Medical Association is the next student of mine.
So I think that in these areas where I have helped to
shape the destiny of some of our students, those
are the ways in which I have contributed. Well,
that's a good way to end the interview. Thank you
very much.